[Music]
all decaffeination methods start with
this the green or unroasted coffee bean
most methods use water to get the
caffeine out of the bean then a chemical
solvent is often used to get the
caffeine out of the water solvent is
then removed and the remaining water is
dried off there are two possible
chemical solvents that can be used in
this process both of them technically
speaking toxic but for the time the
process is complete they found at such
vanishingly low levels that they are
below the European regulated safe limit
but to avoid any solvents there are
other methods that some manufacturers
use to remove the caffeine what an
alternative uses a charcoal filter
another uses carbon dioxide at extremely
high pressures so you can choose solvent
free coffee if you want but there's not
any evidence that it's actually healthy
there is however something else that you
should be aware of if you're thinking of
going decaf your decaf may not contain
any chemical nasties but you might be
surprised to know that it probably does
contain some caffeine a 2006 study
conducted in Florida found that 9 out of
the 10 decafs they tested had at least
some caffeine in them so the two shots
decaf latte that you're drinking might
contain as much caffeine as a can of
coke today nearly one in five of us
choose to drink a milk substitute and
more than a quarter of Brits believe
there are healthier than dairy milk but
are they really we're going to look at
two of the most popular soya and almond
any milk substitute is going to have to
work pretty hard to match it take
protein for example in milk and in soya
there's tons of it but look at almond
hardly any at all so look at the calcium
in the milk here we've got tons in dairy
and we've also got loads is soy an
almond but in dairy it occurs naturally
in soya an almond it's been added and
studies show that the natural calcium
found in cow's milk is easier to absorb
than the fortified calcium found in the
soya and almond alternatives perhaps one
of the least known constituents of milk
is iodine though most of us run a little
low on idean especially pregnant women
but studies have shown that children who
have low levels of iodine are at risk of
lower cognitive development and if you
have a look here at our 3d glasses you
can see that Dairy Milk is a great
source of iodine but in soya and almond
milk they will be hardly any soy milk
contains phyto estrogens which are good
for women going through the menopause
and for prostate health in older men
there's also an argument that says
plant-based fats are better for us than
dairy fats but that's an ongoing debate
[Music]
red wine is thought to be good for you
because it's made using the grape skin
which contains a family of chemicals
called polyphenols
these have been the source of intense
study for decades and one has been
probed more than most resveratrol
this is an East African killifish
let's call him Arthur Arthur is a
handsome beast but sadly his time on
this earth is short just a few months
but that's useful for scientists who
study longevity so the scientists ran an
experiment to see if giving resveratrol
to fish like Arthur made them live
longer what they found was that the fish
in the experiment given the row
spiritual lived up to 40% longer now
that's pretty astonishing if you're an
African killifish what you'll find if
you read beyond those headlines that say
something like a glass of red wine a day
keeps the doctor away is that at the
bottom of the article it will say that
the experiments were actually done on a
fish like Arthur a worm a fruit fly or
sometimes just cells in a dish and even
if we do one day discover that
resveratrol has significant beneficial
effects on people this still a catch
when it comes to getting it from wine
this is a glass of Pinot Noir happens to
be from the Yarra Valley in Australia
now Pinot Noir is a light red with low
acidity medium tannins and some of the
highest levels of resveratrol of any
wine in the world at around 10
milligrams per litre unfortunately
though most of the studies on
resveratrol have been done using
capsules like this and in order to get
as much or as Verrill out of my wine as
there is in this capsule I would need to
drink all of these bottles here so I'd
better get coming
[Music]
arsenic is well-known as a poison but
most of us don't realize it occurs
naturally in soil and water so tiny
amounts can get into food levels tend to
be higher in rice because it's grown
under flooded conditions the EU brought
in new regulations on the levels allowed
in rice products
I must admit and it had never ever
occurred to me that there was arsenic in
rice and does it matter I mean sort of
doses you find it in does it really
affect your health totally we know that
low levels chronic exposure to arsenic
causes a wide range of disease and over
lifetime exposure at least increase
risks of cancer we know that if you have
low levels exposure during infancy that
it causes a range of other developmental
problems things immune development it's
gross weight development its IQ
development are all linked to arsenic
exposure Andy has tested levels of
arsenic in different types of rice and
compared them with other cereal crops he
found that white basmati rice has five
times as much arsenic as wheat or barley
other white rice typically has 10 times
the amount and brown rice 20 times the
legal limits for arsenic in children's
rice products like baby rice are set at
half the adult man but puffed rice
cereals don't have to meet the child
requirements because they are deemed as
not being directly marketed at children
the Food Standards Agency also advises
that children under four and a half
should not be given rice drinks as these
two contain arsenic the aptly named
microwave oven uses microwave radiation
to heat food all that these microwaves
do is cause water molecules in the food
to vibrate generating heat that spreads
through the surrounding molecules now it
has been claimed that this damages
proteins and destroys nutrients in our
food but is any of this true well the
short answer is yes but that's not as
terrible or as unusual as it sounds
actually what happens in a microwave is
no different from what happens on a
stove heating by any method changes
proteins and nutrients in fact when you
boil vegetables in water you can lose
even more goodness because the nutrients
that were in the veg tend to end up in
the water
which you then throw away so if you want
to cook in a way that best preserves
nutrients what you actually need are
shorter cooking times that limit the
exposure to heat and a cooking method
that uses as little water as possible
and when you look at it like that a
microwave is a good bet in fact studies
looking at vitamin C have shown that
levels in food can be higher after
microwave cooking than after boiling so
if you like using the microwave carry on
in some cases your food might actually
be more nutritious
[Music]
so I've come to an independent food
laboratory in Kent they've agreed to
conduct a special test for us they're
gonna check the calorie count on some
popular foods that we've bought at
random from different supermarkets first
we have to take each product and make a
consistent mix of its ingredients this
gloop goes off to be analyzed in the lab
separated into its different chemical
constituents which are measured
precisely
okay so first up a pork pie yeah
so the makers have said 370 calories per
portion yeah and we found 410 yeah so
it's a forty calorie difference that's
about 10 percent yeah right
well the pork pie has 40 calories more
per portion they passed the pasta bake
okay nice ready does that good actually
manufacturers say 667 you guys say six
seven zero so that's bang audience very
very close now our value for the pasta
bake was spot-on but the others varied
by up to 10% this may seem surprising
given how precise the labels appear but
actually it's within government
guidelines and that's because the number
of calories will change slightly from
packet to packet
[Music]
a really good example of how additives
can be fairly obvious in foods is salad
dressings now first up if I make my own
at home all I'm going to put in is you
know a bit of olive oil and vinegar and
then I always bring in a bit of mustard
and then just give it a good stir that
does the job no additives needed now oil
and vinegar don't mix but the mustard in
my dressing a tastes really good but B
it acts as an emulsifier and what that
means is that there's a chemical in the
mustard that bridges the gap between oil
molecules and vinegar molecules that
essentially repel each other and
essentially makes my dressing into an
emulsion but that doesn't last very long
now as my salad dressing settles you can
see all the different components the oil
and the vinegar is separating and also
all the mustard seeds have settled to
the bottom but if I show you an
equivalent salad dressing that comes
from a shop there's no separation
whatsoever and all the seeds are
suspended throughout it looks very
different but I need just one secret
ingredient to get my DIY dressing bottle
ready now this is e4 1/5 or exams and
gum and it's a very popular additive
it's used in hundreds of salad dressings
and sauces and it comes from this little
bacteria exam thermo nurse campestris
and it's what causes the black spots on
broccoli and cabbage and it uses this
gum like substance that it secretes to
attach to the leaves of the vegetables
but when that gum is dried out it looks
like this and if I add a little bit to
my dressing that's already I can notice
a bit of a difference the gum further
emulsifies the dressing but also
surrounds the molecules of oil and
vinegar stabilizing the mixture so that
the oil and vinegar can't separate back
out
but xanthine is also a thickener it's
also made my dressing a lot more viscous
and that means that all the muss recedes
are now sort of permanently suspended in
my dressing and suddenly these two don't
look that dissimilar anymore because
it's so thick I can even water it down
which not only makes it cheaper to
produce it also gives you a fraction of
the calories per teaspoon so if I were
to take a supplement would it in fact do
me any good well I'm gonna take one and
find out
[Music]
the pill I've taken is a typical
multivitamin containing high doses of
most of the vitamins especially vitamin
C which is the most popular single
vitamin supplement sold to see if it's
doing me any good I took a sample of my
blood from before the pill to measure
the amount of vitamin C in my body from
my diet now to see what happens to the
supplement I've taken I'm collecting all
my urine for 24 hours as a lovely
present for a team here at the
University of East Anglia led by
Professor Bill freighter right now
produced so much urine that it wouldn't
fit on the urine measuring scales don't
know how to feel about that slightly
proud maybe a little bit ashamed as well
Phills team get to work analyzing my
body fluids they start with the vitamin
levels in my blood before I took the
pill this will reveal how much vitamin C
I was getting just from my normal food
and drink for the pill my normal diet
was providing me with all the vitamin C
my body needed but what happened when I
tried to top it up with a supplement how
much of the vitamin in the pill would
remain in my body and how much would
pass straight through from the tablet we
extracted about 425 milligrams
urine contained over 530 milligrams of
vitamin C so you've passed the tablet
and a little bit more which is probably
what you've taken in in your diet they
said my body was full of as much vitamin
C as it can hold and anything else I put
it in I just
[Music]
you